Documenting new Online DDL via VReplication, 'online' strategy (#718)
vitessio/website: content/en/docs/user-guides/schema-changes/ddl-strategies.md

1 row in set (0.00 sec)
```

## Choosing a DDL strategy

Different strategies have different behavior for `ALTER` statements. Sections below first break down specific handling and notes for each strategy, followed by an evaluation of the differences.

### online/VReplication

The `online` strategy invokes Vitess's built in [VReplication](../../../reference/vreplication/vreplication/) mechanism. It is the mechanism behind resharding, materialized views, imports from external databases, and more. VReplication migrations use the same logic for copying data as do other VReplication operations, and as such the `online` strategy is known to be compatible with overall Vitess behavior. VReplication is authored by the maintainers of Vitess.

VReplication migrations enjoy the general features of VReplication:

- Seamless integration with vitess.
- Seamless use of the throttler mechanism.
- Visibility into internal working and status of VReplication.
- Recoverable after failover.

### gh-ost

[gh-ost](https://github.com/github/gh-ost) was developed by [GitHub](https://github.com) as a lightweight and safe schema migration tool.

To be able to run online schema migrations via `gh-ost`:

> - If you're on Linux/amd64 architecture, and on `glibc` `2.3` or similar, there are no further dependencies. Vitess comes with a built-in `gh-ost` binary, that is compatible with your system.

Reviewer: Should it be mentioned that this is true of the Vitess Docker images on Dockerhub?

Author: Added!

- On other architectures:
  - Have `gh-ost` executable installed
  - Run `vttablet` with `-gh-ost-path=/full/path/to/gh-ost` flag

Vitess automatically creates a MySQL account for the migration, with a randomly generated password. The account is destroyed at the end of the migration.

Vitess takes care of setting up the necessary command line flags. It automatically creates a hooks directory and populates it with hooks that report `gh-ost`'s progress back to Vitess. You may supply additional flags for your migration as part of `@@ddl_strategy` session variable (using `VTGate`) or `-ddl_strategy` command line flag (using `vtctl`). Examples:

- `set @@ddl_strategy='gh-ost --max-load Threads_running=200';`
- `set @@ddl_strategy='gh-ost --max-load Threads_running=200 --critical-load Threads_running=500 --critical-load-hibernate-seconds=60 --default-retries=512';`
- `vtctl -ddl_strategy "gh-ost --allow-nullable-unique-key --chunk-size 200" ApplySchema ...`

> Do not override the following flags: `alter, database, table, execute, max-lag, force-table-names, serve-socket-file, hooks-path, hooks-hint-token, panic-flag-file`.

Reviewer: Can you add more detail here? Will something bad happen if you do? Or will Vitess reject the request? Or will Vitess silently drop your flags?

Author: Good point! Added.

`gh-ost` throttling is done via Vitess's own tablet throttler, based on replication lag.

### Using pt-online-schema-change

[pt-online-schema-change](https://www.percona.com/doc/percona-toolkit/3.0/pt-online-schema-change.html) is part of [Percona Toolkit](https://www.percona.com/doc/percona-toolkit/3.0/index.html), a set of Perl scripts. To be able to use `pt-online-schema-change`, you must have the following setup on all your tablet servers (normally tablets are co-located with MySQL on same host and so this implies setting up on all MySQL servers):

- `pt-online-schema-change` tool installed and is executable
- Perl `libdbi` and `libdbd-mysql` modules installed. e.g. on Debian/Ubuntu, `sudo apt-get install libdbi-perl libdbd-mysql-perl`
- Run `vttablet` with `-pt-osc-path=/full/path/to/pt-online-schema-change` flag.

> 

Reviewer 2: This section should be updated since we merged vitessio/vitess#7603.

Author: Clarified that `pt-osc` and dependencies are pre-installed in Vitess Docker images

- `set @@ddl_strategy='pt-osc --null-to-not-null';`
- `set @@ddl_strategy='pt-osc --max-load Threads_running=200';`
- `vtctl -ddl_strategy "pt-osc --alter-foreign-keys-method auto --chunk-size 200" ApplySchema ...`

Vitess tracks the state of the `pt-osc` migration. If it fails, Vitess makes sure to drop the migration triggers. Vitess keeps track of the migration even if the tablet itself restarts for any reason. Normally that would terminate the migration; vitess will cleanup the triggers if so, or will happily let the migration run to completion if not.

Do not override the following flags: `alter, pid, plugin, dry-run, execute, new-table-name, [no-]drop-new-table, [no-]drop-old-table`.

`pt-osc` throttling is done via Vitess's own tablet throttler, based on replication lag, and via a `pt-online-schema-change` plugin.

### Comparing the options

> There are pros and cons to using either of the strategies. Some notable differences:

Reviewer 2: Nit: there are more than two options, so it should be "any" or "each" instead of "either".

Author: fixed

#### General

- All three options mimic an `ALTER TABLE` statement by creating and populating a shadow/ghost table behind the scenes, slowly bringing it up to date, and finally switching between the original and shadow tables.
- All three options utilize the Vitess throttler.

#### Support

- VReplication (`online` strategy) is internal to Vitess and supported by the Vitess maintainers.
- `gh-ost` enjoys partial, informal support from Vitess maintainers.
- `pt-online-schema-change` is out of the maintainers control.

#### Setup

> - Vreplication is part of Vitess

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- VReplication is part of Vitess
```

Author: fixed

- A `gh-ost` binary is embedded within the Vitess binary, compatible with `glibc 2.3` and `Linux/amd64`. The user may choose to use their own `gh-ost` binary, configured with `-gh-ost-path`.

> - `pt-online-schema-change` is not included in Vitess, and the user needs to set it up on tablet hosts.

Reviewer 2: Also needs to change.

Author: Clarified that `pt-osc` and dependencies are pre-installed in Vitess Docker images

#### Load

> - `pt-online-schema-change` uses triggers to propagate changes. This method is traditionally known to generate high load on the server. Both VReplication and `gh-ost` tail the binary logs to capture changes, and thi sapproach is known to be more lightweight.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `pt-online-schema-change` uses triggers to propagate changes. This method is traditionally known to generate high load on the server. Both VReplication and `gh-ost` tail the binary logs to capture changes, and this approach is known to be more lightweight.
```

Author: fixed
